DOGTROT

To avoid any confusion at the onset, Project DogTrot is a purely digital project--there is no physical robot dog (yet).

Project DogTrot began as a preliminary investigation into the dynamics of quadrupedal motion. A quick literature review reveals that stability in dynamic legged locomotion is still very much a developing field, and while there are a few robot quadrupeds in this has been achieved (famous examples being Boston Dynamic's Spot and MIT's MIT Cheetah), there is an exciting amount of room for improvement and exploration in the field yet.

In DogTrot, I take the first infantile steps towards understanding the complexities of dynamic legged locomotion--to solve a problem, you first need to know the problem. DogTrot employs a very naive approach towrads achieving a stable gait within a simulated environment--a first-principles, broad-strokes approach to tackling an involved problem.

DogTrot isn't much of a project in itself, but rather a gateway into bigger things. Stay tuned for more exciting stuff!

DESIGN OVERVIEW

DogTrot was modelled in Solidworks, and its URDF model was generated and exported thereafter. DogTrot is intentionally designed to be perfectly symmetric with respect to its sagittal plane, with its body additionally symmetric with respect to its frontal and transverse planes. All legs share the same model, mirrored across DogTrot's sagittal plane.

VREP is used as the simulation environment, and Matlab the engine that drives DogTrot's movement. In VREP, LUA scripts provide object handles for manipulation in Matlab, and implement the trajectory spline each foot follows. An equivalent Matlab model of the robot dog is constructed as a tree of structure arrays, and the LUA object handles are linked to each object within this structure array. Basic object properties are registered in VREP, while motion commands are scripted in Matlab and effected in VREP.

== EXPERIMENTS ==

STABLE TROT

As DogTrot was designed with symmetry in mind, I posited that a gait and foot trajectory could be designed to take advantage of this symmetry to eliminate complications in the dynamics involved. Each foot follows a vertical triangular trajectory with rounded corners that is approximately symmetric with respect to the frontal plane, with its origin a location defined with respect to the body frame (the trajectories move with and are fixed in the body frame). The gait pattern chosen is the trot, where each leg moves antagonistically 180&deg out of phase with respect to its closest-neighbouring leg. The intention here is to eliminate or minimise moments about the anteroposterior and dextro-sinister axes of DogTrot throughout gait cycles.

It is unavoidable that DogTrot will experience instantaneous disturbances to roll and pitch throughout the gait, as the pairs of feet that share the same phase are not expected to always land at exactly the same time, and the antagonistic pairs of feet are not guaranteed to exert the same force on the ground to counter each other's generated moments. To account for this, each leg is modelled to be a series-elastic actuator (SEA) stemming from the shoulder joint and extending to the foot. This model is approximately implemented by registering derived spring and damping constants to the shoulder and knee joints of each leg in VREP. The idea here is that by the elastic nature of each leg, the legs on the side towards which DogTrot is rolling/pitching will, upon contact with the ground, compress more than the others and thus exert a greater force to correct for the undesirable rolling/pitching--the force exerted by the feet increase with shoulder proximity to the ground due to the rolling/pitching of the body.

A caveat of the SEA model, however, is in the introduction of trajectory cycle frequency concerns: the SEA model features a smaller mechanical bandwidth. The frequency of cyclic foot loading should deviate from harmonics of the resonant frequency of the SEA leg to avoid oscillation amplitude growing out of control over time. The smaller mechanical bandwidth needs to encompass cycle frequencies significantly distant from these harmonics as well to ensure fast response times.

FRANTIC BOUND

With success in effecting a stable trot, the idea was extended to a bounding gait. However, this found very limited success, with DogTrot eventually losing control and falling over after a few successful cycles. To be honest, the implementation of the bounding foot trajectory was not very well thought-out, and I believe the large asymmetry in the trajectory design with respect to the frontal plane led to its turning turtle about the dextro-sinister axis. With more work fine-tuning the trajectories to achieve symmetry of ground forces across the frontal plane and moments about the dextro-sinister axes, a stable bounding gait could potentially be achieved with this method.

FUTILE PRONK

As a little bonus, a pronking gait was attempted. As expected, the pronking gait entailed the lowest risk of instability, and DogTrot was able to perform many gait cycles without toppling. However, perhaps because of the lack of properly simulated traction and weak extension of the legs, the pronk effected was more motion than locomotion.